Hello everyone, and welcome to another episode of Coding Adventures. Today, I'd like to do some more raytracing. So where we left off a year or so ago, we were able to render little scenes such as this one, or this one, and these look pretty nice I think, we've got a lot of the basics going, like shadows and reflections, specular highlights, and even depth of field.

But we can only play around with these in extremely simple scenes, because the raytracer is currently incredibly inefficient. What I'd like to begin with then, is to actually visualize this inefficiency, so that we can track our attempts at improving it. So at the heart of our raytracer, we have this ray collision function, which loops over all the models in the scene, skipping over any where the ray misses the entire bounding box, but otherwise looping over all the triangles in the model's mesh, to see whether the ray hits them or not.

This is what the shader spends the vast majority of its time doing, so obviously the fewer of these tests we need to do, the faster it's going to run. And so to monitor this, I've just added in this counter here, to count the number of tests. Now this code is called by our trace function, which handles actually bouncing the rays around the scene, and I've just set it up to keep track of that counter across all of the bounces, and at the end, just output the count as the colour of the current pixel.

So 0 tests would be displayed as black, and 2000, as I have it set to at the moment, would be white. And if it exceeds that display threshold, I've asked it to just output red instead, so that we get a clear indication of that. Okay, then loading in this little scene, which has 456 triangles for this low poly night, and just a handful more for the walls and so forth, let's have a look at our new debug view.

Currently, I've limited the rays to 0 bounces, in other words, we're only considering direct hits, and so the bounding box of the night is all that really shows up here, and we can see that this is running at around 370 frames per second. Then let's increase the bouncer limit to 3 maybe, and we can see that it's had a pretty drastic effect on the performance, taking us down to 50 frames per second, with many of the pixels having to test well over 1000 triangles now it looks like, as the rays bounce around the scene. This by the way is with only 1 ray per pixel, which clearly gives very noisy results, but of course if we go up to 2 rays per pixel, that's going to roughly double the number of triangle tests we're doing, and 2 rays is still unfortunately nowhere near enough for a clean image, even in this very simple scene we need a couple hundred at the very least.

So my goal for today is to go from struggling with this simple little night, to hopefully being able to render this classic test model, a 3D scan of a majestic dragon, containing no fewer than 871,000 triangles, which if you know your numbers is quite a bit more than 456. We're going to need to build up to that though I reckon, so let's use blender's handy decimate modifier, to cut this all the way down to just about 8000 triangles instead, which should be a more manageable starting point. So let's swap out the night for that dragon, and see how it goes.

With 3 bounces, it looks like we have a lot of pixels testing around 35,000 triangles, and my computer is suddenly suffering over here. Let's then try increasing this to 2 rays per pixel, and okay I need to turn this off before something explodes. So to speed this up, I want to try a little technique that goes something like this.

We begin as we do already with a bounding box around our object, which we test against the ray to see whether it's worth bothering to test all of the triangles. But now to reduce the number of triangles we have to test if it does hit the box, it would be really nice if the mesh was actually split in half, and each of these halves could have their own bounding box, that we could then again test against the ray. There's a good chance the ray will only hit one of them, which means that we could already forget about the entire other half of the mesh.

And then we just keep doing the same thing, so this could be split into another two halves like this perhaps, and we test against those bounding boxes, and so on until we decide it's time to just check all of the remaining triangles. Basically the idea boils down to bounding boxes inside of bounding boxes, or more formally it's a hierarchy of bounding volumes, BVH for short. Okay, so let's try implement it.

What I have so far is just this little bounding box class which can be fed a point, and it will simply grow to enclose it. Calculating the bounds of a mesh is then just done by looping over all the vertices, and feeding them to the bounding box. And just for fun, here's how that looks in action.

Okay, so now we want to recursively split this bounding box in half, and we want to keep track of things such that when our ray hits one of the bounding boxes, we're able to access the two child boxes that it was split into. To that end, I've created this node class which holds a bounding box, as well as all of the triangles contained within it, and then also a reference here to those two potential child nodes. Then to construct the BVH, I've written some code here that first calculates the bounding box of the entire mesh, then sets up the triangles, before finally creating our root node, and passing it into this split function.

In there, the node is assigned two children, and then we loop over all of its triangles, and decide whether they should become part of child A or child B, based on whether the center of that triangle is in the left or right half of the bounding box. As we add the triangles, we also grow the bounding boxes of the children, and once that's done, we just recursively split the children in half. Then just to make sure that this doesn't go on forever, I've told it to stop once it reaches some maximum depth, which I've set to a completely arbitrary value of 10 at the moment.

Now to see whether this is all working as expected, here's some quick debug code, which simply takes in the root node, and draws its bounding box, and then recursively draws its children's bounding boxes as well, up until whatever depth we want to visualize it to. So let's take a look. We're at depth 0 at the moment, so let's increment the visualization by 1 over here.

And that looks like it's been nicely split in half. So then let's try going one level deeper, and another, and another, and another. It looks like it's working alright, but currently we're always cutting it into these vertical slices, like some loaf of bread, which certainly doesn't feel like the right way to do things.

I think it'd make more sense to always split the bounding boxes along their longest axis instead, so that we don't get these super skinny slices. For example, over here the bounds are longest vertically, so intuitively I feel like we should split them in half like this. To do that, I've just modified our function slightly to calculate the index of the longest axis, so that's 0, 1, or 2, corresponding to x, y, or z, which we can use to look up the center of the bounding box along that axis, and partition the triangles accordingly.

Okay, let's try this again. And that's looking a lot more sensible, I'd say. Alright, so with this basic version in place, I think we should figure out how exactly we're going to use this thing to speed up our triangle tests.

So here's a little function I've been working on, and this isn't in shader language yet, because it's easier to test and debug stuff on the CPU, so we'll have to translate it later. But how this works is that first of all, we check if the ray has hit the bounding box of the current node, which would start out as the root node, of course. And if so, we check if the node is a leaf node, which just means that the node has no children.

And in that case, since we can't go any deeper, we just need to test all of its triangles. If it's not a leaf node though, then we recursively test its children. Alright, so now using this function, let's try firing a ray at the dragon mesh, and see how it goes.

At the moment, it's testing only the root node's bounding box, and it's missing that, so it goes no further. If we aim the ray so that it does hit it though, now we can see that it's testing the two children, but missing both of them, and again stopping there. So let's then aim the ray so that it hits the tail of the dragon here, and we can see how it quickly narrows in on the node that contains the triangle we want.

Okay, I just want to test this a little bit more quickly, but it does look like it's working, at least as far as I can tell the correct triangle is showing up in green, and we can see from the triangles in red that it's only testing a pretty small subset of the entire mesh. So that's pretty good. Now I'm sure there's no shortage of things we could still do to improve this, but I'm a bit impatient to start figuring out how we can send this BVH data to the GPU, so that we can use it in our actual raytracing shader.

So all of the data is currently stored in these nodes, but there's a couple of problems here. First of all, each node contains references to their child nodes, so under the hood, C-sharp is obviously keeping track of where they've been stored in memory, and letting us just access them without having to think about it. But the shader language doesn't do this kind of thing for us, so instead we'll need to maintain a big list of all the nodes that we create, and then replace those references with the index in that list where the children are stored.

Okay, so I've just modified our split function quickly to work with this change, basically it just adds the two new child nodes onto the end of this list of all nodes, and stores the index of the first one in the parent node. Obviously we can find the second child by just adding one to that index, since they're stored right next to each other. Now we do also need to tweak our BVH traversal code here to deal with these changes, so the concept of the children being null no longer makes any sense, instead we can say that this is a leaf node if its child index hasn't been set, meaning that it's still just at 0. 0 does technically point to the root node, but of course the root node can't actually be anyone's child.

Anyway, we also need to tweak the code here where we're passing the children into the recursive function, and we can now just look them up by index, like so. Alright, our problems are not over quite yet though, because currently each node has its own list of triangles, since I felt like that was the simplest way to get things up and running, but it does mean that we now have a list of nodes, each storing a list of triangles, and this kind of nesting of lists or buffers in the context of shaders is not supported there. So we're going to want to have just one giant array of triangles, and then store an index for where the triangles of each node begin, as well as the number of triangles that the node contains.

Of course, this does mean that all of the triangles of a node need to be in one continuous range, not scattered all over the array. So let's think about this for a moment. Imagine that these are the center points of our triangles, and we're dividing them into side A on the left, and side B on the right.

They're going to be in whatever random order initially, but we want to sort them such that all of the points on side A are together at the start of the array, and obviously then all of the points on side B will be together at the end of the array. Okay, so we're going to need to loop over all of the points to check if anything is out of place of course. And starting at point 0, we can see that this is on side A, so that's good.

Next up, we'll take a look at point 1, which is on side B. And this is also fine, so long as there aren't any more points remaining on side A. Now obviously we can see that there are, but the little computer we're imagining in our minds is only going to find that out now when we take a look at point number 3. This is back on side A, so clearly things are jumbled up. That is not too hard to fix though, because we know that this is the second point that we've encountered on side A, which means it should be at index 1 in the array. So a good solution I think is to simply swap its location in the array with whatever point is currently sitting in its spot.

And now everything is correct, at least for the points we've looked at so far. Alright, I believe we can just repeat this idea over and over until we're done, but let's just make sure that it plays out correctly. So we'll now move on to the point at index 4, which is the third point we found on side A, meaning it should have an index of 2. So again, let's just swap it with the point currently at index 2 to resolve that.

Okay, let's go through the rest super quickly. So point 5 is the fourth point on side A, so we'll just swap it with the point at index 3. Then point 6 here is on side B, and like before the computer doesn't know yet if this is correct or not, so we'll just move on to point 7, which is back on side A. It is the fifth point we found over there, so it should be at index 4. We can again just make the swap to correct that. Now with all these swaps done, it looks like everything has worked out perfectly.

We have points 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 on side A, and points 5, 6 and 7 at the end on side B. So, I've been making some more changes to the split function to handle all of this. Basically, the two child nodes now inherit the triangle index from their parent, and then we have this loop over the range of the parent's triangles, which starts out for the root node as being all of the triangles of course, and then inside this loop we figure out like before which side of the split the current triangle lies, and then update the bounding box and triangle count of the corresponding child. Finally, if the triangle is on side A, then we need to do that switcheroo we were just talking about to unjumble the order of the triangles.

Okay, so let's just make sure that this is still working, which it appears in fact very much not to be. Hang on a second. Alright, this took me embarrassingly long to realise, but I just messed up the swap syntax over here.

It should be like this. Okay, and now it does appear to be working, meaning that I believe we finally have our BVH in a format that the GPU can work with. By the way, I thought it might be fun to just quickly visualise the order into which the triangles are being sorted.

So what we're seeing at the moment is the triangle centres appearing in the initial random order, and by random I just mean whatever was defined in the mesh file. And then next, let's see them appearing in the order that we sorted them into. Okay, I don't really have anything to say about this, I just thought it'd be nice to see.

Alright, so next up I've just been working on sending the data over to our raytracing shader, and here's the code for doing that. There were some complaints about the nodes and bounding boxes being classes instead of structs, which is problematic for memory layout reasons, so that should be refactored at some point. But I've just hacked in a very crude fix for now, because I'd much rather talk about a more interesting problem I ran into, while porting our BVH traversal code to the shader.

As we saw earlier, this works by recursively testing all of the child nodes, but what I'd kind of forgotten is that the shader language doesn't actually support recursion. So to get around this, I've had to spend a bit of time transforming it into an iterative approach instead. How this works is that we create an array at the start here, to allow us to remember which nodes we still want to search.

And this does unfortunately have to have a fixed size by the way, because we can't do dynamic allocations in a shader. So I've just set it to 10, since that's the maximum depth we have for the BVH at the moment, but we'll revisit this number later of course. Then we're going to treat this array as a stack that we can push nodes onto, and pop nodes off of.

So at the start, the only node we want to search is the root node, so we begin by just pushing that onto the stack. Then we have a loop that keeps running until the stack is empty, and in here we pop the latest node off from the top of the stack, and assuming that the array hits its bounding box, we then have a look at whether it's a leaf node or not. If it is, then like before we test the array against all of its triangles, but if not, then instead of recursively searching its children, we simply push both of them onto the stack to be searched in future iterations.

And that's actually all there is to it. So for example, this last node that we push will now be on the top of the stack, so in the next iteration they'll be popped off, and its two children potentially will be pushed on. Then let's imagine that both those children are leaf nodes, so in the next two iterations they'll both get popped off, and have their triangles tested, at which point all that remains on the stack will be the first child node that we originally pushed on.

So then that gets popped off, and we look at its children, and so on. So hopefully it's clear that this is doing the exact same depth-first search as our original recursive implementation, we're just achieving it now instead with a stack and a loop. I was pretty confident that this was going to work, but after enabling the raytracer, I was greeted with a blank screen.

A few frustrating minutes later though, I finally figured out that I had been sending all of the triangles to the non-existent triangles buffer, which the computer apparently did not feel like warning me about. The next attempt then went a little better, at least there were some triangles on the screen, but it wasn't quite the majestic dragon I was anticipating. This turned out to be just another silly mistake though, and so after a bit of fiddling around, at last the entire raytraced dragon was on screen, and running pretty smoothly.

I'm very happy that this is working, but this is only the low-poly version of the dragon of course, containing a mere 8712 triangles. So with our basic BVH in place, I think we're ready to upgrade to this medium version, with over 87,000 triangles instead. Before we try running it though, I quickly want to add some debug information to our BVH traversal code, in particular I want to count the number of bounding box intersection tests we're doing, and also the number of triangle tests, just like we did right at the beginning.

And here's a little function for displaying that information. Okay, let's try running this now, and it definitely does feel a little stuttery with all these extra triangles, so we're going to have to make some optimizations for sure. Let's switch the visualization mode over to show the number of bounding box tests, and currently this is completely red, meaning that the numbers are outside of our display threshold, but we can just raise that over here, maybe to around 100.

So most of the time we're doing fewer than 100 of these box tests per pixel it seems, but particularly when reviewing the model face-on, or from the rear two along its longest axis, we can see how that increases dramatically, up to as high as roughly 230 it looks like. All right, let's also take a look at the triangle count, and again this is just pure red at the moment, so let's increase the display threshold, and this is all the way up to 2000 at this point, so there is quite a lot of triangles being tested on every ray. I think it might be quite nice to actually see the triangle and bounding box views simultaneously, since together they kind of tell the full story.

So I've quickly added in a new debug mode here, where the triangle tests are shown in the red channel, the box tests in the blue channel, and if either of them clip outside of the display range, then that's now indicated with pure white this time. All right, let's give that a try, and that looks pretty cool. I'm honestly not sure yet how much practical value this is going to have for us, but I like to do this sort of thing anyway, because you never know what insights you might gain, and at the very least it's fun to look at.

In the name of fun, I also want to turn on the frame accumulation mode here, so that we can see the results averaged out across a full rotation of the dragon. This is pretty funky looking, but perhaps not super easy to interpret. Anyway, while the dragon was spinning around, I also tracked the frames per second that the program was running at per degree of rotation, and we can see the result of that plotted over here.

So it's running at around 37 frames per second on average, although the performance does dip when viewing the front or back of the dragon, which makes sense with the increased number of tests that we were seeing at those angles. The first thing I want to address though is the fact that we're clearly doing a lot more triangle tests than box tests, which I think just means that we need to increase the depth of the BVH. For interest's sake, I've quickly printed out some statistics for the BVH we have at the moment, and we can see that on average, each leaf node contains 85 triangles, with at least one leaf containing a whopping 949.

Remember, this is with a depth limit of 10, and we do need to enforce some kind of limit, because of course the stack in the shader has a fixed size. But let's just see what happens if we do remove the depth limit in the split function here, and just to make sure it doesn't keep trying to split the nodes forever now, I've also told it to only keep going so long as both children actually contain any triangles. Alright, let's take a look at what the BVH is looking like now.

So here we're visualising a depth of 18 for example, and clearly it's a lot more detailed than what we had before. If we try running the raytracer now though, the stack is too small, and so we get these little holes in the mesh. Also, it seems to have just crashed.

Anyway, loading this back up, let's check out the BVH statistics, and we can see that most of the leaves have just a single triangle now, with the maximum being 23. We can also see that the maximum depth it's going to is 27, so maybe we could just round that up to a nice number like 32, and use that as the stack size, and as an absolute depth limit when generating the BVH, just to guarantee things don't get all holey and crashy again. Alright, so now that we've settled on a more generous depth limit, let's just for reference take a look at the old version that had a depth limit of 10, and as we saw we were doing well over 2000 triangle tests per pixel in many cases.

Then let's swap this out now for our new BVH with a depth limit of 32, and the visualization is so faint I can barely see anything, which means we can bring the display threshold here all the way down to around 70 it seems before some red starts creeping in. So almost all the pixels are testing fewer than 70 triangles, and many of them are quite a lot lower than that. So this seems like a really huge improvement I think.

Of course the number of box tests will have gone up, so let's take a quick look at that as well. Here's our old version doing roughly 100 box tests per pixel in many cases, and our new version now looks like this, with most pixels doing somewhere below 200 it looks like, and a few going as high as roughly 500. Still overall this is looking a lot better than before, so let's pull up our performance plot, and I'm excited to see what kind of speeds we're reaching now.

Okay, my excitement has turned to despair. We're reaching exhilarating speeds of 20 frames per second. I'm quite surprised by this, because while the number of box tests did increase a bit, the number of triangle tests was drastically reduced, and the box tests are cheaper than the triangle tests.

My best guess then is that it's the overhead of actually pushing and popping more nodes on the stack that's killing our performance. So I guess let's roll back this change, and maybe focus first on improving the efficiency of our traversal algorithm, before we increase the depth. One thing we noticed before of course, is how the number of tests is currently very dependent on how far we're looking through the model, which is definitely something we can optimize.

So let's consider a little example here, where we have bounding box 0 containing the entire mesh, and a ray passing through it like this. Since the ray hits the box, we'll then push its two children onto the stack, and to begin with we'll look at box 1 over here, which the ray does hit, and let's say that this is a leaf node, so we then look at all of the triangles, and we detect this intersection over here. Next up on the stack is box number 2, which the ray also hits, but actually we could just reject this box right away, on the grounds that we've already found a triangle that's closer than anything inside of that box could possibly be, or in other words the ray has become too short to reach that box.

Of course in reality each of these boxes might contain many levels of other boxes, so if we find a triangle intersection early on, we can potentially skip a ton of work. So in the code I've been using this function for detecting intersections between rays and bounding boxes, and happily this already actually calculates the distance to the box as part of the computation. So I've simply tweaked the function to output that distance value instead of true or false, and I've also told it to report the distance as infinite in the case that the ray misses the box entirely.

Alright, so then in our traversal code let's just update this bounding box test to only look inside of the box if it's closer than our current closest result. Okay, with that let's run the performance test again now, and we can see that we've gained a sizable speed up when viewing the model from the front, but it drops off to about the same as before when viewing it from the back. This does make a lot of sense though come to think of it, because if we go back to this little example and say that the ray instead comes in from the opposite direction, well the way it's currently programmed, it's still going to look at bounding box number 1 first, and so even if it hits a triangle in there, we're anyway going to have to look inside of box number 2 afterwards to figure out if it's hitting a closer triangle somewhere in there.

So in our traversal code, I guess one way we could improve things is if we were to remove the bounding box test from over here, and instead test the bounding boxes of the children before pushing them onto the stack, so that we can make sure that the closest child gets looked at first. And here's some quick code for doing exactly that. We calculate the bounding box distances, then look at which is closest, and make sure we push the closest child last, so that it's on the top of the stack.

Running our little debug view now, we can see that we're no longer getting those excessive hotspots when looking from either the front or back of the dragon, so that's very nice. And just for contrast, here's a reminder of what it was looking like before. Okay, I'll also run the performance test again quickly.

And we're seeing a healthy speed up across the board, with peaks when viewing from the front or back now, since the dragon covers less of the screen in those cases. So with the efficiency of the traversal algorithm greatly improved, I'm curious to see whether increasing the depth limit from 10 back up to 32 is going to help us or hurt us again this time. And the answer is that it is now giving us a massive speed up, shooting all the way to an average of almost 400 frames per second, which I'm very happy to see.

I do want to go back to the traversal code for a moment though, because I'm not yet quite content with the implementation. What's bothering me is that when we look at this closest child node that we've pushed onto the stack here, we might of course detect a triangle intersection inside of it, or inside one of its descendants. But at that point, we've obviously already pushed this other, further away child onto the stack, which means we don't get to skip it in that case.

Now it's maybe not so terrible, because once we test its two children, we'll immediately see that they're both too far away, and that branch of the search will end there. But still, it doesn't seem ideal. So what I'm trying now is to replace the bounding box distance tests with a cheap estimate, namely the square distance to the center of the bounding boxes, and that can be used for choosing which order to search the children.

Unfortunately, the estimate obviously can't be compared to the actual triangle intersection distance, so we just always push both children here. But then we can now bring back the old bounding box distance test that we had removed up here, and that way we're always culling the nodes based on the most up-to-date triangle intersection distance that we have. Okay, hopefully this will make a difference.

And indeed it has, just not in the direction I was hoping. So if we take a look at our debug view now, it appears that at some viewing angles, there's a bunch of extra tests that suddenly need to be performed, on account of our distance estimate being, well, an estimate. But that's only at certain angles, and the performance drop seems to be pretty consistent across all angles.

So I guess calculating those cheap estimates, and probably more so having to always push both children onto the stack, are outweighing the benefits I was hoping to see. So I think we should abandon this idea, but it has got me thinking about the efficiency of our stack. And I think one way we could try to improve it, is to represent it as an array of integers, rather than an array of nodes.

These integers are of course just indices, for looking up the actual value in the node buffer. So then down here, we're of course now pushing the child indices onto the stack, rather than the child nodes themselves. I'm not certain that this is a good idea, because while a single integer is obviously a lot smaller than our node structure, and so is easier for the machine to deal with, there is now that extra lookup from the node buffer as a tradeoff.

Well, let's just run it and find out. And it looks like it's actually had a surprisingly big effect, with our program now averaging around 530 frames per second. So that's very nice.

I do think we should keep trying to squeeze more performance out of this though, because once we allow the rays to bounce multiple times around the scene, and have multiple rays per pixel again, we'll definitely be glad of every little speedup we can find. So I've been doing a bit of research, in particular reading through this great series of articles on how to build a BVH, which talks about a bunch of the stuff we've just been doing, but also an idea that's new to me called the surface area heuristic. So let's imagine for a moment a simplified little 2D scene, with a bunch of triangles scattered around.

And what we want to do is simply partition them into two groups. The way we've been doing this so far is to take the longest axis, so the horizontal one in this case, and then make the split at its centre. Obviously that's not the only possibility though, we could split it over here, or over here, or even along the other axis, and so on.

So the question we're faced with now is, what's best? And a reasonable answer I suppose is to say, whichever one results in the computer having to do the fewest triangle tests. For instance, let's consider this blue bounding box here for a moment, which contains four triangles in this case, and so for all the pixels inside of that box, the computer would have to do four triangle tests. Now we don't actually need to know the exact number of pixels, we can just say that it's proportional to the area of the box, which is about 20 in this case.

And so let's say that the cost of this box is that area, times the four triangles, which comes out to about 80. And we can do the same thing for the other box, to get a cost of 623, for a combined total cost of 703. With this cost metric in place, we could then, if we had the patience, go through and evaluate every possible configuration, to find the one with the lowest cost.

Which happens to be this one by the way. Now of course, in reality, we can actually then split each of these boxes into another two boxes, and so on. And so to guarantee an optimal solution, I assume that right from the outset, we'd need to consider all the possible future outcomes.

And that's just not computationally feasible for us to do. Instead, we're going to take this so-called greedy approach, of just pretending that each split is the final one, and optimizing the cost of that, without worrying about how it might affect the future. Alright, so this was a 2D example, but in three dimensions, the idea is essentially the same.

The only thing to consider is that we don't really care about the number of pixels that a box covers, since our rays will be able to bounce around the scene, and hit the box from any direction. So we care instead about the probability of some random ray hitting a box. Naturally though, the bigger the box, the greater the odds.

So it's simply proportional to the entire surface area of the box. Okay, so in the code, I've defined this little cost function here, which simply calculates the surface area of a node's bounding box, and then multiplies that by the number of triangles it contains. Next up, we have this chooseSplit function, which up till now has been returning the midpoint of the longest axis, but I've just been modifying it to instead loop over each axis, and then try splitting it at increasing intervals along that axis.

It would be ideal to test all possible splits, but for the sake of quicker construction times, I've just defined a fixed number of tests to do over here. Anyway, it evaluates each of these potential splits, and simply chooses the one which results in the lowest cost. Then here is that evaluation function, which just calculates the bounding boxes for the specified split location, then uses our cost function to calculate each of their cost values, and adds them together to get the overall cost of the split.

Finally, our main split function has remained pretty much unchanged, the only difference is that when it asks for a split position to be chosen, it now also gets the associated cost value that we calculated. It can then compare that cost to the cost of the node we're about to split, and if the new cost is higher, that means that we're actually making matters worse, and we should just stop. Alright, so I've just tried running this now, and it is taking half an eternity to complete at around 8 seconds, compared to barely 500 milliseconds previously.

On the other hand, the BVH definitely seems to be much higher quality. For example, the maximum number of triangles in a single node is down to 4, from the 23 we had before. And at the same time, instead of going all the way to a depth of 27 at its deepest node, it now only goes to 23, so that's pretty nice.

Taking a look at the BVH itself, we can see that it's decided to split the dragon into two vertical slices this time, although of course that's not guaranteed to actually be the best choice, since we are only testing 5 different split points along each axis. Anyway, let's see how the splits progress from here. So, this is now at a depth of 8, if I counted correctly, and let's quickly take a look at the remaining depths as well.

So this is looking good, but the time it takes to generate is a bit bothersome. I don't necessarily care about it being super fast right now, but let's at least optimize the very lowest hanging fruit. The main operation we're doing is really just growing bounding boxes, so we definitely want to make sure that this function is as fast as possible.

Currently we have to do minmax operations on all three points of the given triangle, so a simple improvement we could make is to actually pre-calculate the min and max points of each triangle, and that way we can cut down on the number of minmaxes we have to do while the core algorithm is actually running. Then I've also tried forcibly inlining these minmax calculations, because I believe that functions are not inlined when we're just running code inside the Unity editor. I'll need to fact check that, but either way it did help, and the BVH construction time is down now to around 750ms, which I can live with for the moment, although I have been enviously eyeing the results shown in this paper about fast parallel construction on the GPU, where for the full 870,000 triangle dragon, so 10 times what we're doing at the moment, they're reporting times of around 20ms, so that's maybe something to try in the future.

But anyway, for now, let's just try running the performance test, to see whether using the surface area heuristic to improve our BVH has actually translated to a tangible speedup in rendering. And it looks like it has, taking our average frames per second up to almost 630. Okay, now there's one last idea I want to try, which comes again from the how to build a BVH writeup I mentioned, and this is a way of slightly compressing each of our nodes so that they take up fewer bytes.

At the moment, they contain 6 floats for the bounding box, and 3 integers, for a total of 36 bytes. Now someone please correct me if I bungle this explanation because I am not an expert, but here is a graphics card, and on the card is the GPU, surrounded by some memory chips known as VRAM, which is where our node buffer lives. When we request a node from the buffer though, it won't just fetch the exact 36 bytes that make up the node we want, but rather, depending on the GPU, something like 128 bytes of surrounding data, to be stored in the fast cache memory that lives inside of the GPU itself.

That just means that the next time we ask for a node, if it happens to be inside of the cache already, we get it much faster. So our data being 36 bytes is a bit awkward if it's reading in multiples of 32. I don't know exactly how these misalignments are dealt with, but presumably it could slow things down, and certainly if we could squeeze an extra node in per cache line, that could only be good news for us.

So the idea then is that currently we have one variable to store the index of the first triangle that this node contains, and another variable to store the index of the node's first child. But we only really need to know the triangle index if this is a leaf node, and by definition a leaf node can't have any children, so in fact we can combine these into a single variable that refers to either triangles or children based on the context, which takes us down to 32 bytes per node. This does make things slightly more confusing for us of course, and I'm going to have to go and refactor some stuff behind the scenes now, but sometimes I guess one has to prioritize the computer's happiness over one's own.

Alright, I've made the necessary changes, but there's nothing interesting to show there, so let's just skip to the performance test, where we can see that this has indeed made the computer a little happier, boosting us to slightly over 700 frames per second on average now. So I think it's finally time to try upgrading our dragon one last time, from 87,000 triangles to the full 870,000, and this is how our BVH looks for that, visualized at a depth of 22 here. Then let's see how it runs, and the performance has unsurprisingly taken a bit of a hit, from 700 frames per second down to around 500 now.

Just out of interest, let's also take a look at our box test view, and that's looking pretty cool. For reference, here's how it was looking before. I do wonder to what extent the slowdown we're experiencing is caused by simply having to do some extra box tests, versus potential bandwidth issues, which is where the GPU is basically spending more time just waiting for memory to arrive, since there's obviously many more megabytes of dragon to get through now. 

I'll need to learn if there's a good way of debugging that sort of thing, and we could try stuff like reducing the size of our triangle structure for example, to maybe improve that, but let's save it for another day. What I'd like to address now though, is the fact that everything we've been doing so far only works with a single model, and it ignores any scaling, rotation or translation of that model. To fix this, I've first of all just added in a little matrix to the shader, and this gets updated every frame with the current transformation matrix of the model.

Well actually the inverse of it, which just means the matrix that takes the model from its transformed state, back to its original state. What we can then do is apply this inverse matrix to the position and direction of the ray that we're shooting, so that we don't have to worry about transforming all of the triangles and bounding boxes of the BVH. To help picture what this is doing a bit better, I quickly made this little visualization where we can see a bunch of rays shooting out from the camera here, and we also have this cube model which we can move around. 

Except rather than the cube moving, we can see that the rays actually move in the opposite direction instead. And similarly, if we try rotating it, we can see how the rays rotate the opposite way around the object, to achieve the equivalent effect. Lastly, if we scale this up on the y axis for example, we can see how the rays get squished together on that same axis, meaning that more of them will intersect the original cube, making it appear elongated. 

And the reverse of course happens if we squish the cube down. So that's all that those matrix multiplications are doing. Alright, let's then test this out on the dragon. 

So I'll first scale it down so that we have a nice small dragon, and then scale it up into a big fearsome dragon. That's looking good, and then we can also rotate it. Or at least I thought we could. 

What's going on over here? For some reason the dragon is kind of dissolving, and this seems to be affected by both the rotation of the model and our viewing angle. Oh, I just realised something I forgot, which is that our ray structure contains not just the direction of the ray, but actually the inverse direction as well. This is just because our bounding box intersection test requires dividing by the direction of the ray, but since division tends to be a little slow, it's better to just calculate the reciprocal of the ray direction at the outset, and then multiply by that in here instead. 

So let's just quickly set that inverse direction after we transform the ray. And now if we try this again, it looks like rotation is working. We should test the position too, and that's looking good. 

And finally I just want to double check that the scaling is still working, but that's looking good as well. Alright, next up I want to get multiple models working with our BVH setup. So I've just been this little mesh infrastructure that we created last time, and it now holds these node and triangle offset values, so that we can cram all of the nodes and triangles into the two buffers we have already, and then just jump to the correct place in those buffers for any given mesh.

That matrix we were just working with is now also stored in here, so that we can move, rotate and scale each model individually. And finally there's the material settings that we created last time as well. Okay, then to set this up, I've also just been working on this function here, which takes in all of the models we want to render, and loops over them to construct their BVH, and pack all of their nodes and triangles together.

Of course if we have multiple copies or instances of the same mesh, we don't need to create a new BVH for each one, or even store its triangles and nodes again, since we already have that data from the original instance, we just need to know where it's located. For that purpose, I've made a little dictionary up here, and only if the dictionary doesn't contain the current mesh, do we actually bother to construct the BVH and all of that. The mesh then obviously gets added to the dictionary, along with the current offsets into the node and triangle lists.

Finally, when we're actually creating the mesh info over here, we can look up those offsets, and also assign the matrix and material settings. So this data is returned at the end of the function, and behind the scenes it then just gets packed into buffers, and sent over to the shader. Then in the shader, I've brought back this ray collision function now that we're dealing with multiple models again, and I've just been updating it a little bit to work with all of our changes. 

So basically for each model, it first transforms the ray into the model's local space, and then instead of the brute force triangle search from last time, it of course now calls our BVH traversal function to do the test much more efficiently. And here we're passing in those offsets by the way, which just get added onto the original indices inside that function now. Finally, if a new closest intersection is detected, we just record some information about it here.

So, with that in place, we can now give our dragon a little friend. And it's been on its own for so long, let's add in a few more for good measure. Okay, things have definitely not gone entirely according to plan though, because as we can see, objects in the foreground are not necessarily being rendered in front of the things in the background, which is a little confusing to look at. 

I must have mixed something up with the distance test, it's supposed to always just overwrite the result with the closest hit information. And it looks like I somehow just forgot to actually record the distance in here when I was reworking this function. So with that fixed, now the models are being rendered in a far more sensible fashion. 

Alright, let's then plop the dragon back into our little rendering test box here, and I'll set the material to be nice and reflective, and then let's see how this looks when rendered with multiple bounces. Okay, it's looking a little strange actually, as if the light is not quite bouncing correctly, so I think maybe there's something wrong with the normal vectors. And indeed, what I've just realised now is that since we've transformed our ray into the local space of the model, the normal vector we're getting back is in that local space as well, so we have to actually transform it into world space over here. 

Alright, I think the normals are looking good now, so let's try rendering this again. And that's definitely looking a lot more like what I was hoping for. Okay, just for fun, I've been playing with the material settings a bit, making the walls slightly reflective, and turning the dragon to more of a waxy gold, and let's see what that looks like. 

It is looking pretty good I'd say, and I'm excited that we're able to now render these much more complex models. To be clear though, despite all of our optimisations, when we have multiple bounces and multiple rays per pixel, for example here I'm using 5 bounces and 5 rays, the result is barely interactive at around 15 frames per second currently. It is still quite fun to play around with though, but it would be really nice if these preview renders were less noisy, so that we could maybe even get away with fewer rays and have things run a little bit faster. 

So in the future, I definitely want to look into importance sampling techniques, where I believe the idea is to bias the bounces of each ray towards light sources to reduce noise, and then do some kind of funky maths I guess, to account for the bias that that introduces. For today though, I'd like to close out our work with a quick comparison to where we started. So we had this little night in a box scene, made up of 530 triangles, which at 3 bounces per ray and 1 ray per pixel, was running at around 50 frames per second. 

And we saw that up to roughly 2000 triangle tests were being done per pixel in the worst cases. What we have now though is a scene with over 3.5 million triangles, rendering at only a slightly worse 40ish frames per second. Let's also take a look at the number of triangle tests here, at 0 bounces, 1 bounce, 2 bounces and 3 bounces, and we can see that it's below 50 for most pixels, so clearly our BVH is doing some very heavy lifting.

Of course we do also now have a bunch of box tests being performed, so let's take a look at those as well, starting from 0 bounces again, 1 bounce, 2 bounces and 3 bounces, and we can see that these are mostly below 500 per pixel. So it does actually seem like it should be doing less work overall here, and yet it is still slightly slower, so my best guess is again that it's a memory bandwidth issue, which I'll try to investigate some other time. For today though, let's just make one last render here of this little family of dragons, just hanging out inside another very famous test model of the Sponza Palace.

We haven't actually got around to implementing textures yet, so the result is a little on the plain side, but still I'm very happy that we have the ability to render much more elaborate scenes now, so I'm excited to play around with this much more in the future. But that is all for today, so as always I'd love to hear if you have any thoughts on how this could be improved, or ideas for other topics you'd like to see me cover. Alright, until next time, thanks for watching!